---
layout: post
title: Exception Handling - How We Can Display Correct Error Messages To Users
description: >-
  Error handling is all about controlling how the program deals with and handles errors using exceptions. As developers or beginners in coding, one of the first things we do is learn how to read error messages and debug. What happens when an error occurs with a user of the system, not a developer?
author: Sheikh Hussain
date: 2026-01-04 20:30:00 +0000
categories: [Python Course, 30 Days of Python - Asabeneh]
tags: [python, programming, course, 30days, day17, part1]
pin: false
math: false
mermaid: false
render_with_liquid: false
media_subpath: /assets/img/posts/
---

This topic doesn't need a lot of explanation as its quite straight forward. Exception handling in Python is all about using specified outputs for specific errors. Earlier, I wrote about the different [Type Errors](https://sheikh-h.github.io/Blog/posts/python-day15/) that we have in Python and what they mean. Today, we'll use them in code blocks to specify what the program does when it encounters one of these problems.

On this pass, I learnt that `try-except` code blocks are used to try and prevent the program from a complete halt over an error, or to provide detailed outputs designed for everyday users.

Think about everyday users of a system, they won't be able to read something like:

```console
$ python example.py
Enter your age: abc
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "example.py", line 1, in <module>
    age = int(input("Enter your age: "))
ValueError: invalid literal for int() with base 10: 'abc'
```

However, they _would_ understand something like this:

```console
$ python example.py
Enter your age: abc
Oops! That’s not a number. Please enter a valid number.
```

This is where we use **exception handling** to configure our system to provide better descriptions for errors. By combining Python's error types with `try-except` code blocks, we can create programs that better communicate errors to a user of the system. This way, whoever the system is intended for will know how to rectify the error made.

During this post, I will describe the customised output of errors as `try, except` code blocks and the default error messages as _tracebacks_.

---

## Try and Except Syntax

This is the basic structure of a `try` / `except` block in Python:

```python
try:
    # Run this code
except [ExceptionType]: # eg ValueError, TypeError, ZeroDivision...
    # Execute this code if an exception occurs in the try
else:
    # Run this if no exceptions in try
finally:
    # Always run this code, regardless of exceptions
```

In practice, beginners will mostly use just `try` and `except`.
Key points to take away from `try, except` are:

- The **try block** runs first
- If an error occurs, Python immediately goes to the **except block**
- The program does come to a halt, but with a non-technical explanation as to why.

---

### Example:

```python
try:
    print(10 + '5')
except TypeError:
    print('unable to add a string type to an integer, try again!')
except ValueError:
    print("")
```

This example demonstrates how, if our program encounters a `TypeError`, it will give you a specific error message for that, and if a `ValueError`, something else. At first, I thought that using the `try-except` function would begin a loop and allow the program to go a step back to revert the error; while you can get the program to do this by placing it in a `while` loop, it's not designed for that.

---

## What Exception Handling Is Really For

Exception handling is all about controlling the output for each error, not eradicating errors. We will always have situations from either the user or the developer where something goes wrong in the code or while using it. What we need to have done is control how the error is displayed and what it allows next.

For developers, Python’s default error messages are extremely helpful.  
For users, they are often confusing and intimidating.

To keep my learning journal as organised as I could, I've decided to split day 17 into 2 posts. One about exception handling and the other going in a little more detail about intermediate tools and patterns available in Python.

[Go to day 17 part 2](https://sheikh-h.github.io/Blog/posts/python-day17-2/)
